---
title: Mathematics - Applications and Applicability (REVIEW)
date: 2016-04-16
---

"Mathematics - Application and Applicability", by Mark Steiner. 

Included in The Nature of Nature: Examining the Role of Naturalism in
Science (2011). Edited by Bruce L. Gordon and William A. Dembski. ISI
Books: Wilmington, Deleware. 

### Key ideas

Canonical applications (theories developed to describe an application)
vs. non-canonical (applying mathematics in situations other than those
that created them) 
Distinguishing applications of mathematics from mathematics itself
Exploration of individual thinkers and their attempts to reconcile
mathematics and the empirical world (including Gottlob Frege, Hartry
Field, Eugene Wigner), with the group-theoretic leading the charge

### Quotes

"What are we doing when we 'apply' mathematics to Nature?"

"Other skeptics argue the reverse, that we should expect mathematics to
be applicable because (unlike what Eugene Wigner asserts) the real and
ultimate source of mathematical concepts is experience; thus, it is not
at all unreasonable that mathematical concepts should return the favor."

"We may fundamentally misrepresent what we do not detect - for example,
when we think that the four dimensions of space-time are continua (they
may, for all we know, be lattices)."

"I am persuaded by John Locke's central insight that the world could
turn out to be fundamentally unlike what it appears to be, and the
framework of space and time is no exception". 

### Summary

Mark gives examples of canonical nonempirical applications, including an
explanation of how the definition of of multiplication in terms of
repeated addition is wrong. They present instead a set-theoretic
presentation, that could be "'applied' to addition".

They then move on to group theory, which they explain was not set up to
describe symmetries in the world, but rather constructed to be applied
internally to mathematics itself - specifically to algebra (by Galois).
They claim that Galois, by studying groups of equations in order to
learn more about the equations, "inaguarated modern mathematics, in
which the main applications of mathematics are to mathematics itself."

They move into an exploration of group theory in quantum mechanics -
kicking diving into an exploration of electron spin. He tangentially
references Heisenberg's 1932 assertion that the neutron and proton are
actually tow different states of the same particle ("today called the
'nucleon'"), which I though was pretty cool. They move on from
discussing electrons and nucleons to hadrons. Group theory is further
supported in Murray Gell-Mann and Yuval Ne'eman's predication of a 10th
hadron in the SU(3) family and Gell-Mann's theoretical identification of
"quarks" stemming for a prediction of "existence of the three pions
form the three-dimensional representation." 

And yet the author cautions our reading of group theory's applications
by saying, "the historical players would mostly have rejected this
characterization." After centuries of math being used to derive
quantitative results from phenomena we could also describe
qualitatively, we now can see our "mathematics giving even the
qualitative descriptions". 

Gottlob Frege demonstrates that applications can involve concepts (i.e.
two-ness) of things rather than the things themselves, thereby side
stepping the need to reconcile mathematics and the empirical world.
This, and the exploration of the group-theoretic (with specific
phenomena being signified by the properties of their symmetry group), is
the bridge between mathematics and empirical reality this articles is
building. 

Mark ends the article by throwing the ball back up in the air when he
asks "whether Pythagoreanism is an acceptable doctrine". 
